It is only those who could forgive Hitler that could beat him. Forgiveness is far stronger than hatred. No war can be won with hatred, no battle even. Any battle founded on hate ends with two losers. But any battle founded on love ends with two winners. You might say, "What about hatred for sin? We are called to love people and hate sin. We should fight against it." Ye never said a truer word. However, such battles may be fuelled with a hatred for sin, but they are founded on love for the sinner. We ought not to hate sin for its own sake. We ought to hate sin because of what it does to those we love. Because we ought to love and want the best for people, we ought to hate that which ruins them. Those who do not have it in them to love and forgive their enemy cannot have it in them to truly and fully love and forgive even their neighbour.

Evil is a privation of the good. Hate is evil. Love is good. We must therefore accept hate is merely a privation of love. What the world calls hatred is really apathy, a mere privation of love. But what the world calls apathy, that is true hatred. Hitler did not hate too much. Hitler loved too little. Hatred is born of apathy, not the other way around. That privation of love, that seed of "nothingness", if left to itself, will sprout and grow into a tree of hatred. A tree with no mass, no energy, no visibility. It does not exist. But it does have an effect. And its effects are devastating.

How are we to understand this? We have been given the perfect analogy in our world: the shadow. The shadow does not exist; it is a mere privation of light. But shadows are dark, scary, gloomy, depressing, obtrusive. Shadows are many things, but a thing itself is not one of them. Children are not scared of the dark, for the dark is nothing and nothing comes from it; they are scared of the absence of light. It is not that a child fears a monster will be summoned from the darkness, but that they fear a monster is already there, and they desire nothing more than the light to banish or expose it.

The solution to the trembling child is not to defeat the dark, but to turn on the light. For the light overcomes the darkness, but the darkness cannot overcome the light. It would have to exist to do that. The problem is not that the child ought not be scared of the dark, for deep down he is not; deep down he is appropriately desiring the light. The problem is the lack of light. Where there is not light without, there shall be light within. For the light of the world is not content in merely radiating some of his light for us to occasionally glance at. No, he insists on living within us. It will not do for us to be content with a night light; we must be overflowing with light from within. We must be the light of the world, and we ought to let our light shine among others.

We are all called for this, we all have the potential for this, most of all children. But children are not raised with this in mind. The world seems to think hatred a thing in itself, and apathy a mere delusion. The world will not be content until it has taught each and every child to be so concerned with something that does not exist that they come to believe darkness is true reality and light was the mere delusion. The task of the modern educator is not to cut down forests, but to irrigate deserts. How much more is this true if there are no trees to be cut down, and infinite deserts to irrigate!

How are we to be surprised when we find aspiring lumberjacks in a world with no need of cutting anything down? He is to be a cultivator of the most beautiful of deserts: himself. He can still be at any moment. But we cannot be surprised when we face a world with such people; we have made it so. We can either fix it or face the consequences. And no one who knows anything of history will not know of how dire the consequences are.

We promise generations that if only they were to become lumberjacks, they will be given forests to cut down. If we inspire in them a desire for cutting down in a world with no forests, how can we be surprised when they turn to people instead? As a thirsty man in the desert mistakes the sand for water, so does the bloodthirsty lumberjack mistake the people for trees.

Hitler did not start out with a hatred for people. Hitler started out with a hatred for the destruction of his country, disguised as a love and passion for the good of his country. He had been given the axe and told to aim for the trees. But there are none; there never have been. The appropriate reaction here is to realise you aren't meant to be a lumberjack but a cultivator. It is good that one should love his country. It is bad and mistaken to think the way to help it is not to irrigate deserts but to cut down forests.

Of course, the wrong reaction to one finding out there are no forests to cut down is to hallucinate them. So desperate to find something to cut down, everything begins to look a lot like trees. These people are the problem, and those people are the problem, and these things are all the problems. No, if we are to take our ideas seriously and to their conclusions, then there are no problems, not really. Only shadows.

We have seen that the solution to the child's fear of the dark is not conflict with the dark but relationship with the light. The same principle is alive here. Focus on the dark and it will only grow. Focus on the light, so much that we are overflowing with it, and there is no room for darkness.

This is yet another of the many reasons why monotheism is so revolutionary an idea for a society and the reason for the turning point of human history. We can either focus on the innumerable problems, shadows, and monsters of the dark in this world, prioritising their destruction, or we can focus on the sole light of the world, who, given our permission, can shine so bright within and without that it is as if there was never any darkness. A world full of light. A world aimed up.

Seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things will be given to you as well. Look how much the pockets of light in the world throughout history have achieved (and facing much harder problems). Imagine how much more we could all do now, if only we let our light shine.

But we must first invite the light within; it is not within us by default. It is not natural. It is in fact very unnatural, supernatural even. It will hurt, for we are lovers of our own pockets of darkness within, and the light will make it as if it had never existed. But we must let it. We must not think that we can truly and fully have the light of the world dwelling within us and still manage to keep our favourite areas of darkness here and there where we want. No, it must all go. Light is not discriminatory; it will overcome all, even that which we so desperately cling to.

But we must let it happen. We were not made to be a decent house, but a glorious mansion. We were not made for a reasonable amount of happiness and the rest filled with whatever we want. We were made for infinite joy, and we can invite it in at any moment. We were not made to sail the seas; we were made to walk them.

It is time we step out of our boats into the water; it is scary indeed. You may even sink a little. But all we must do is focus on the shining hand reaching out into the water, and we will be pulled up. The waves will calm, for the problems were never comparable to the solution. And we will not sink, not because the waves have calmed, but because the water has dried up. We are left facing a desert, and we have a job to do.
